*Amo la historia*

*Pero la historia no me devuelve su amor*

*Cada vez que la llamo me responde su contestador automático*

*Ella dice: "Inserte su logo aquí"*


Un tanque en un pedestal. Los humos ascienden del motor. Un tanque sovietico
llamdo IS# por Iosip Stalin está siendo reutilizado por un grupo de
separatistas pro-rusos en Konstantinovka

A tank on a pedestal. Fumes are rising from the engine. A Soviet battle
tank—called IS3 for Iosip Stalin—is being repurposed by a group of
pro-Russian separatists in Konstantinovka, Eastern Ukraine. It is driven
off a World War II memorial pedestal and promptly goes to war. According
to a local militia, it “attacked a checkpoint in Ulyanovka,
Krasnoarmeysk district, resulting in three dead and three wounded on the
Ukrainian side, and no losses on our
side.”[^1^](21_NotesAlvarMacielalvarmacielgmai9197lcom.xhtml#ch1-fn-1){#ch1-fn_1}

One might think that the active historical role of a tank would be over
once it became part of a historical display. But this pedestal seems to
have acted as temporary storage from which the tank could be redeployed
directly into battle. Apparently, the way into the museum—or even into
history itself—is not a one-way street. Is the museum a garage? An
arsenal? Is a monument pedestal a military base?

But this opens up more general questions. How can one think of art
institutions in an age that is defined by planetary civil war, growing
inequality, and proprietary digital technology? The boundaries of the
institution have become fuzzy. They extend from pumping the audience for
tweets, to a future of “neurocurating” in which paintings will surveil
their audience via facial recognition and eye tracking to check whether
the paintings are popular enough or whether anyone is behaving
suspiciously.

Is it possible, in this situation, to update the twentieth-century
terminology of institutional critique? Or does one need to look for
different models and prototypes? What is a model anyway, under such
conditions? How does it link on-and off-screen realities, mathematics
and aesthetics, future and past, reason and treason? And what is its
role in a global chain of projection as production?

In the example of the kidnapped tank, history invades the
hypercontemporary. It is not an account of events post factum. It acts,
it feigns, it keeps on changing. History is a shape-shifting player, if
not an irregular combatant. It keeps attacking from behind. It blocks
off any future. Frankly, this kind of history sucks.

This history is not a noble endeavor, something to be studied in the
name of humankind so as to avoid being repeated. On the contrary, this
kind of history is partial, partisan, and privatized, a self-interested
enterprise, a means to feel entitled, an objective obstacle to
coexistence, and a temporal fog detaining people in the stranglehold of
imaginary
origins.[^2^](21_NotesAlvarMacielalvarmacielgmai9197lcom.xhtml#ch1-fn-2){#ch1-fn_2}
The tradition of the oppressed turns into a phalanx of oppressive
traditions.[^3^](21_NotesAlvarMacielalvarmacielgmai9197lcom.xhtml#ch1-fn-3){#ch1-fn_3}

Does time itself run backwards nowadays? Did someone remove its forward
gear and force it to drive around in circles? History seems to have
morphed into a loop.

In such a situation, one might be tempted to rehash Marx’s idea of
historical repetition as farce. Marx thought that historical
repetition—let alone reenactments—produces ludicrous results. However,
quoting Marx, or indeed any historical figure, would itself constitute
repetition, if not farce.

So let’s turn to Tom Cruise and Emily Blunt instead, which is more
helpful. In the blockbuster *Edge of Tomorrow*, the Earth has been
invaded by a savage alien species known as Mimics. While trying to get
rid of them, Blunt and Cruise get stuck in a time-looped battle; they
get killed over and over again, only to respawn with sunrise. They have
to find a way out of the loop. Where does the Mimic-in-chief live?
Underneath the Louvre’s pyramid! This is where Blunt and Cruise go to
destroy him.

The enemy is inside the museum, or more accurately, underneath it. The
Mimics have hijacked the place and turned time into a loop. But what
does the form of the loop mean, and how is it linked to warfare? Giorgio
Agamben has recently analyzed the Greek term *stasis*, which means both
civil war and immutability: something potentially very dynamic, but also
its absolute
opposite.[^4^](21_NotesAlvarMacielalvarmacielgmai9197lcom.xhtml#ch1-fn-4){#ch1-fn_4}
Today, multiple conflicts seem to be mired in stasis, in both senses of
the term. Stasis describes a civil war that is unresolved and drags on.
Conflict is not a means to force a resolution of a disputed situation,
but a tool to sustain it. A stagnant crisis is the point. It needs to be
indefinite because it is an abundant source of profit: instability is a
gold mine without
bottom.[^5^](21_NotesAlvarMacielalvarmacielgmai9197lcom.xhtml#ch1-fn-5){#ch1-fn_5}

Stasis happens as a perpetual transition between the private and public
spheres. It is a very useful mechanism for a one-way redistribution of
assets. What was public is privatized by violence, while formerly
private hatreds become the new public spirit.

The current version of stasis is set in an age of cutting-edge
nonconventional warfare. Contemporary conflicts are fought by
Uber-militias, bank-sponsored bot armies, and Kickstarter-funded toy
drones. Their protagonists wear game gear and extreme sports gadgets,
and they coordinate with *Vice* reporters via WhatsApp. The result is a
patchwork form of conflict that uses pipelines and 3G as weapons within
widespread proxy stalemates. The present permawar is fought by
historical battle reenactors (in the Ukrainian example, on both sides of
the conflict), who one could well call real-life
Mimics.[^6^](21_NotesAlvarMacielalvarmacielgmai9197lcom.xhtml#ch1-fn-6){#ch1-fn_6}
Stasis is the curving back of time into itself, in the context of
permanent war and privatization. The museum leaks the past into the
present, and history becomes severely corrupted and limited.

Alfonso Cuarón’s brilliant film *Children of Men* presents another way
that art institutions might respond to planetary civil
war.[^7^](21_NotesAlvarMacielalvarmacielgmai9197lcom.xhtml#ch1-fn-7){#ch1-fn_7}
It depicts a bleak near-future where humanity has become sterile. A
planetary civil war has engulfed Britain, dividing the island into
segregated zones, one for refugees and undocumented persons—a total
dystopia—and another for citizens. Turbine Hall at the Tate Modern has
become the home of the Ministry of the Arts; here, precious artworks are
given a safe haven: an Ark of the Arts. In one scene set in Turbine
Hall, Michelangelo’s *David* is shown with a broken leg, perhaps damaged
during the conflict.

The destruction of antiquities by Daesh (also known as ISIS or Islamic
State), which was preceded by major destruction and the looting of
cultural objects during the US invasion in Iraq, raises the question:
Wouldn’t it be great to have an Ark of the Arts that could rescue the
antiquities of Palmyra or Nineveh and safeguard cultural treasures from
violence?

However, the Ark of the Arts is a quite ambivalent institution. One is
never quite sure what its function really is. In another scene,
Picasso’s *Guernica* is used as a decoration for a private
dinner.[^8^](21_NotesAlvarMacielalvarmacielgmai9197lcom.xhtml#ch1-fn-8){#ch1-fn_8}
The Ark of the Arts might be an institution that has become so secure
that the only people permitted to see the artworks are the Ark’s
directors, their children, and their servants. But it could also be an
evolution of international freeport art storage, where artworks
disappear into the invisibility of tax-free storage
cubes.[^9^](21_NotesAlvarMacielalvarmacielgmai9197lcom.xhtml#ch1-fn-9){#ch1-fn_9}

Besides the international biennial, duty free art storage is probably
the most important contemporary active form for art. It’s like the
dystopian backside of the biennial, at a time when liberal dreams of
globalization and cosmopolitanism have been realized as a multipolar
mess peopled with oligarchs, warlords, too-big-to-fail corporations,
dictators, and lots of newly stateless
people.[^10^](21_NotesAlvarMacielalvarmacielgmai9197lcom.xhtml#ch1-fn-10){#ch1-fn_10}

In the late twentieth century, globalization was described as a formula:
the value of civil society multiplied by the internet divided by
migration, metropolitan urbanism, the power of NGOs, and other forms of
transnational political
organization.[^11^](21_NotesAlvarMacielalvarmacielgmai9197lcom.xhtml#ch1-fn-11){#ch1-fn_11}
Saskia Sassen characterized those activities as “citizen practices that
go beyond the
nation.”[^12^](21_NotesAlvarMacielalvarmacielgmai9197lcom.xhtml#ch1-fn-12){#ch1-fn_12}
The internet was still full of hope and people believed in it. This was
long ago.

The organizational forms pioneered by human rights NGOs and liberal
women’s rights campaigns are now deployed by oligarch-funded fascist
battalions, GoPro jihadi units, displaced dudes playing Forex exchanges,
and internet trolls posing as feng shui
Eurasians.[^13^](21_NotesAlvarMacielalvarmacielgmai9197lcom.xhtml#ch1-fn-13){#ch1-fn_13}
In their wake, para-statelets and anti-“terrorist” operation zones
emerge alongside duty free zones, offshore entities, and corporate proxy
concessions.[^14^](21_NotesAlvarMacielalvarmacielgmai9197lcom.xhtml#ch1-fn-14){#ch1-fn_14}
At the same time, horizontal networks are turned into global fiber-optic
surveillance: the planetary civil war is fought by engaging with the
logistic disruptions of planetary computerization. Contemporary
cosmopolitans do not fail to promptly engage in civil warfare whenever
the chance presents itself. Every digital tool imaginable is put to
work: bot armies, Western Union,
Telegram,[^15^](21_NotesAlvarMacielalvarmacielgmai9197lcom.xhtml#ch1-fn-15){#ch1-fn_15}
PowerPoint presentations, jihadi forum
gamification[^16^](21_NotesAlvarMacielalvarmacielgmai9197lcom.xhtml#ch1-fn-16){#ch1-fn_16}—whatever
works. Stasis acts as a mechanism that converts the “cosmo” of
“cosmopolitan” into “corporate” and the polis into property.

The corresponding institutional model for art is freeport art storage,
built on tax-exempt status and tactical extraterritoriality. *Children
of Men* shows how this model could become a template for public
institutions amid the effects of planetary civil war, securing artworks
to the point of withdrawal. While the international biennial was the
active form of art for late twentieth-century ideas of globalization,
duty free art storage and the terror-proof hypersecure bunker are its
equivalent in the age of globalizing stasis and pop-up NATO fence
borders. But this is not a necessary or inevitable outcome.

![Images](images/img_p6AlvarM1252acielalvarmacielgmailcom.jpg)

Consider how *Guernica* was hung during a previous global civil war.

*Guernica* was made for the Spanish Republic’s pavilion at the 1937
World Expo in Paris, to show the results of airstrikes on civilian
populations. In terms of conservation, this was a lousy decision indeed.
The painting was hung more or less outdoors for quite some time.

In the future projected by *Children of Men*, Picasso’s painting finds
shelter from the mayhem of war in a private dining room. The painting
might be “safe,” and it certainly enjoys a climate-controlled
atmosphere, but very few people will see it. In the historical civil
war, however, a completely opposite decision was made: to expose the
painting, to literally *put it out there*. After all, in French and
other Latin languages, a show is called an “exposition.” Not an
imposition.[^17^](21_NotesAlvarMacielalvarmacielgmai9197lcom.xhtml#ch1-fn-17){#ch1-fn_17}

In terms of conservation, the scenario in *Children of Men* is
contradictory, because the first thing that has to be conserved or even
created is a situation where art can be seen and accessed. Why is this
so? Because art is not art if it cannot be seen. And if it is not art,
there is no point in conserving it. More than the artworks themselves,
the thing that’s threatened by the institutional response to civil
war—be it privatization or overprotection—is public access. But it is
public access, to a certain degree, that makes art what it is in the
first place, thus necessitating its conservation. Hence the
contradiction: art requires visibility to be what it is, and yet this
visibility is precisely what is threatened by efforts to preserve or
privatize it.

But there is something wrong here. The Spanish Republic’s pavilion is,
after all, an example from 1937. Am I not lapsing into bad old nostalgic
Zombie Marxism here? Isn’t this repetition as farce?

The answer is no. Let’s come back to *Edge of Tomorrow* to see how it
solves the problem of the loop. It offers an unexpected solution to the
problem of stasis, to escaping from history-as-repetition. The movie is
based on the novel *All You Need Is Kill* by Hiroshi Sakurazaka, which
built a narrative out of the experience of hitting the reset button on a
video-game console. So it is no coincidence that the movie narrates the
impasse of a gamer being stuck, unable to complete a given level. But
gamers are used to this: it is their mission to get to the next level. A
gamer is not a reenactor. She doesn’t derive pleasure from having to
play the same level over and over again or endlessly reenacting
historical models. She will go online and look up a forum to figure out
how to beat the level and move on. In gaming (most games at least) there
is an exit for each level, each repeated sequence, each loop. Most
likely there is a weapon or a tool hidden in some cupboard, and this can
be used to vanquish whatever enemy and complete the level. *Edge of
Tomorrow* not only maintains that there is a tomorrow, but that we are
positioned at its edge, that it is possible to complete the level and to
break free from the loop. Gaming can evolve into playing. And here, the
ambiguity of “play” is helpful. On the one hand, play is about rules,
which must be mastered if one is to proceed. On the other, play is also
about the improvised creation of new, common rules. So reenactment is
scrapped in favor of gaming moving towards play, which may or may not be
another form of acting.

What does all this mean for the museum? First of all, one could say that
history only exists if there is a tomorrow—if tanks remain locked up
within historical collections and time moves on. The future only happens
if history doesn’t occupy and invade the present. The museum must render
the tank useless upon entry, the way old cannons are filled with cement
before being displayed in parks. Otherwise, the museum becomes an
instrument for prolonging stasis by preserving the tyranny of a partial,
partisan history, which also turns out to be a great business
opportunity.

But what does this have to do with the Spanish pavilion? It’s very
simple. There was one detail I didn’t mention but which is very obvious
if you think about it. In 1937, *Guernica* was new. It was a newly
commissioned artwork dealing with the present. The curators didn’t pick
*Desastres de la Guerra* by Goya or another historical work, even though
it might have fit perfectly too. They commissioned new pieces and
educational setups to speak about the present. To reactivate that model,
one has to do the same. If one wants to reactivate this history, it
needs to be different. On the next level. With new works. In the
present. This is a huge endeavor of course, one that goes far beyond the
task of the museum as it is usually understood. It enters into the
project of re-creating not only the city, but society itself. And here,
we again encounter the idea of play. To play is to re-actualize the
rules as one goes along. Or to create rules that demand new
actualization every time. There is a continuum between games and play.
Both need rules. On one end of the spectrum there is a looped form. On
the other, an open
one.[^18^](21_NotesAlvarMacielalvarmacielgmai9197lcom.xhtml#ch1-fn-18){#ch1-fn_18}

To summarize these ideas about museums, history, and the planetary civil
war: history only exists if there is a tomorrow. And, conversely, a
future only exists if the past is prevented from permanently leaking
into the present and if Mimics of all sorts are defeated. Consequently,
museums have less to do with the past than with the future: conservation
is less about preserving the past than it is about creating the future
of public space, the future of art, and the future as such.

</div>

This eBook is licensed to Alvar Maciel, alvarmaciel@gmail.com on
12/27/2017
